Updates FLIP 200 with new proposal updates (#727)
onflow/flow: flips/20201125-bip-44-multi-account.md

| **Sponsor**   | Peter Siemens (peter@dapperlabs.com) |
| **Updated**   | 2021-12-14 |

## Objective

This document aims to define a standard pattern for the application of [Bitcoin
Improvement Proposal
44](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0044.mediawiki) (BIP 44) in
Flow-compatible hardware and software wallets.

## Motivation

This proposal was prompted by the recent development of the first Flow hardware
wallet application (Ledger) and its companion host software (FCL-Ledger-Web among
others).

In the near term, this proposal affects users of the Flow Ledger application. In
the long term, it affects Flow wallet developers and their users.

## User Benefit

By following this standard, developers of existing BIP 44 crypto wallets will be
able to reduce friction for users who wish to create accounts on Flow.

By standardizing BIP 44 usage across wallets, users should be able to use their
BIP 39 mnemonic codes across wallets to manage access to the same keys and accounts.

## Design Proposal

### Path Levels

BIP 44 defines an implementation of [Bitcoin Improvement Proposal

> 32](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0032.mediawiki) (BIP 32)

Reviewer: The issue with BIP44 and BIP32 is that they only define the derivation on curve secp256k1. 
Referencing BIP32 shouldn't be enough to apply the derivation to another curve, unless we define how we want to generalize the BIP32 technique to other curves. 

There is a [SLIP](https://github.com/satoshilabs/slips/blob/master/slip-0010.md) that did something similar  "SLIP-0010 describes how to derive private and public key pairs for curve types different from secp256k1." but I'm having minor concerns with it. 
 I'll reach out to Vacuum Labs and maybe Ledger to see if there is a known generalization we can reference, otherwise we might need to describe the generalization ourselves (not long). I'll follow up on this.

Reviewer: Update: I reached out to Ledger, but I looks like the answer will come after the holidays. Their answer should help us update FLIP200 (the current doc cannot be complete without specifying this curve derivation point unfortunately) 

cc @JeffreyDoyle

Reviewer 2: Thanks @tarakby. Let's move this discussion to #200 so it doesn't get lost

address for an account. Although Flow does not derive account addresses from
public keys, index can still be used to generate multiple public keys for a
single account.

When applying BIP 44 to Flow, each subsequent value for index should be used to
generate a new key pair for the same account, starting from 0 and incrementing
by 1.

This index should not be confused with the on-chain account key index. It must
not be assumed that this index will reflect the on-chain account key index for
any key.

When generating a new key pair for an account, the key index to use in the path to 
generate the new key should be the smallest unused key index available which 
has not yet been used to generate a key on the account.

### Legacy Path

There exist Flow accounts with keys assigned to them which have been generated
by wallets using the legacy path.

The legacy path has been previously used by FCL-Ledger-Web and is what has been used to
generate keys for Ledger Flow users. As far as we are aware, this is the only
application which has used the legacy path.

The legacy path is _deprecated_ by this FLIP, and should not be used to
generate new keys.

The legacy path is:

```

> m / 44' / 1' / 769 / 0 / 0

Reviewer 2: I agree with Tarak's suggestion. All keys created to date have been on the P-256 curve, so let's specify that alongside the legacy path.

> m / 44' / 1' / 769 / 0 / 0

Author: @tarakby Do we need to be concerned with BLS keys? Or just `ECDSA_P256` and `ECDSA_secp256k1` ?

> m / 44' / 1' / 769 / 0 / 0

Reviewer: No, BLS is not supported by Flow accounts (BLS is just supported by Cadence, that's why you might see it in Cadence docs).

```

### Account Discovery

Wallet developers should use a modified version of the original account
discovery procedure [described in BIP
44](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0044.mediawiki#account-discovery).

Modified constants from BIP 44 include:

The key index gap limit should be `5`.
The account index gap limit should be `5`.

The prescribed account discovery procedure is as follows:

> 1. Derive the key pair using the legacy path, checking it's use with the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Derive the key pair using the legacy path, checking its use with the
```

   public key registry. If an address is found, query the Flow network to fetch
   the account's details. If an account is found, remember the relationship between the

>    path used to generate this key, and the account's details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   path used to generate this key and the account's details.
```

> 2. Derive a key pair (starting with account index = 0 and key index =

Author: Updated to include iterating over both the supported curves, and hashing algorithms as well

   1) using the path specified in this FLIP.
3. Scan for the key usage by checking the public key registry.
   If the gap limit has been reached for both key index and account index, stop
   discovery.
    3.1. If no address is found in the registry 

>         3.1.1 If the key index gap limit has been reached without finding any 

Reviewer 2: I just noticed that the formatting doesn't work for these sub-steps when viewing the rendered markdown (it all goes on one line). Maybe try adding a tick (`-`) before each?

        addressed in the registry, then go to step 2, incrementing the account index

>         by one and starting with key index = 0 again. 

Author: We introduce the account index gap limit before the discovery algorithm. I want to keep the termination step for the algorithm in step 3, because the terminal state for the algorithm is when both the account index gap limit, and the key index gap limit have been reached

>         by one and starting with key index = 0 again. 

Reviewer: You're right, the account gap is already defined earlier 👌🏼  
What I meant is that the algorithm (steps 1. 2. 3.) does not describe what to do with the account gap (while it describes how to deal with the key gap).

>         by one and starting with key index = 0 again. 

Author: Ah yes, the account gap limit is increased when the algorithm hits step 3.1.1

        3.1.2 If the key index gap limit has not been reached, go to step 2 and
        increment the key index by one. 
    3.2. If an address is found, query the Flow network to fetch the account's details. 
        3.2.1. If no account is found<sup>1</sup>, go to step 2, incrementing 
        the account index by one.
        3.2.2. If an account is found, remember the relationship between the
        path used to generate this key and the account's details. Then go to step 2, 
        incrementing the key index by one.

<sup>1</sup>Flow supports account deletion, meaning that an address found in the
registry may refer to a nonexistent account. In this case the account should be

> skipped but discovery should continue.

Reviewer: This is great! Should we also add a similar note for revoked keys? I mean we could precise if we consider a path leading to a revoked key, as a "used" path or a "free" path.

Author: I think it might depend on how the Public Key registry / Hardware Wallet API will have to work. If it returns back addresses for keys that are on the account but are also revoked, i'm less worried about confusion here than if it doesn't return addresses for such keys.

Reviewer: Yep good point, I think this could be precised on the key registry side.

#### Account Discovery Conflict Resolution

It is possible for a wallet to incorrectly apply the specifications in this FLIP
to generate keys.

Should this scenario occur, compliant wallets may be required to work around any
such previous incorrect usage.

##### Conflict Resolution: Incorrect Use of Account Index

If a wallet has used the account index field incorrectly to generate keys for a
user, conflict resolution logic may be required when attempting to generate new
keys.

When generating additional keys, the correct account index to use in the path to
generate the additional key should be:

- If adding a key to a new account:
  - The smallest account index which has not yet been used to generate keys
    set on any account.
- If adding a key to an existing account:
  - The largest account index that account discovery determines has been
    previously used to generate existing keys set on the account, which has also
    not been used incorrectly to generate keys set on another account.
  - Otherwise, the smallest account index which has not yet been used to

>     generate keys set on any account.

Reviewer: I think I see what this sentence means 👌🏼  but I'm sure examples will make it clearer 😅   I'm not saying the examples need to be added to this document.

##### Conflict Resolution: Incorrect Use of Key Index

When generating additional keys for an account, the correct key index to
use in the path to generate the new key should be the smallest unused key index

> available which has not yet been used to generate a key on the account.

Reviewer: This is great, and should be enough. 
To avoid confusion we could also add that a path used with at least one curve is considered "used".  This would prevent wallets saying "the path has been used with curve_1, but it hasn't been used with key_2 yet, so I'm gonna use it again".

Author: Added a new conflict resolution section for this purpose 👍

Reviewer: The new section is great 👌🏼

32](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0032.mediawiki) (BIP 32)
that standardizes a format for hierarchical deterministic (HD) key derivation
paths that support multiple coins and multiple accounts per coin.

The BIP 44 path format is as follows:

```
m / purpose' / coin_type' / account' / change / address_index
```

When using this format to construct or discover a Flow user wallet, the value(s)
of each path parameter should follow the specifications below.

#### Purpose

Purpose is always the constant 44' (0x8000002C), as described in [BIP
44](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0044.mediawiki#purpose).

#### Coin Type

Coin type is always the constant 539' (0x8000021b), the unique identifier for
the Flow protocol, as defined in [SatoshiLabs Improvement Proposal
44](https://github.com/satoshilabs/slips/blob/master/slip-0044.md) (SLIP 44).

#### Account

Account is the index of a distinct account address owned by the wallet user. No
two account indices should be used to generate child public keys that are
assigned to the same Flow account address. Furthermore, a single account index
should not be used to generate keys for more than one account address.

> The Account Index to use when generating a key pair to be added on a new account

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The account index to use when generating a key pair to be added on a new account
```

Personally I'd like to avoid capitalizing terms that aren't proper nouns. I find it difficult to read and don't think it adds much clarity.

> is the smallest Account Index of which has not yet been used to generate keys 

Reviewer 3: Suggest changing "Account Index of which" to "Account Index which" i.e. remove "of"

> The Account Index to use when generating a key pair to be added on a new account
> is the smallest Account Index of which has not yet been used to generate keys 
> set on any account.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When generating a key pair for a new account, use the smallest Account Index that has not already been used to generate keys for an existing account.
```

The motivation for these accounts is the same set forth in BIP 44:

> Users can use these accounts to organize the funds in the same fashion as bank
> accounts; for donation purposes (where all addresses are considered public),
> for saving purposes, for common expenses etc.

> Unlike BIP 44, wallets should not prevent the creation of a new account if any

Reviewer 3: I might rephrase this for clarity as follows:

Key difference: BIP 44 requires that wallets check the accounts associated with previous account indices. If a previous account does not have a transaction history, creation of a new account is prevented. This is expressly not a requirement in this specification (FLIP-200).

transaction history.

In addition to the above, Flow wallets should follow the standards for account
numbering, creation and discovery described in [BIP
44](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0044.mediawiki#account).

#### Change

Unlike Bitcoin, Flow does not utilize change addresses. Change is always the
constant 0.

#### Index

In BIP 44, each index generates a public key that is used to derive a unique
address for an account. Although Flow does not derive account addresses from
public keys, index can still be used to generate multiple public keys for a
single account.

When applying BIP 44 to Flow, each subsequent value for index should be used to
generate a new key pair for the same account, starting from 0 and incrementing
by 1.

This index should not be confused with the on-chain account key index. It must
not be assumed that this index will reflect the on-chain account key index for
any key.

When generating a new key pair for an account, the Key Index to use in the path to 
generate the new key should be the smallest unused Key Index available which 
has not yet been used to generate a key on the account.

### Legacy Path

> There exist Flow accounts with keys on them which have been generated using the

Reviewer 3: Is there a more formal term we could consider than "on them" such as "associated" or "assigned" that would make sense?

> Legacy Path.

Reviewer 2: I think you can be explicit here and mention that, up until now, the Ledger application created Flow accounts using a different interpretation of BIP 44 that we now refer to as the legacy path. And to our knowledge, this is the only application that created accounts in this way.

Great idea to mention the legacy path here!

The Legacy Path is _deprecated_ by this FLIP, and should not be used to
generate new keys.

The Legacy Path is:

```
m / 44' / 1' / 769 / 0 / 0
```

### Account Discovery

Wallet developers should use a modified version of the original account
discovery procedure [described in BIP
44](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0044.mediawiki#account-discovery).

Modified constants from BIP 44 include:

The Key Index gap limit should be `5`.
The Account Index gap limit should be `5`.

The prescribed Account Discovery procedure is as follows:

1. Derive the key pair using the Legacy Path, checking it's use with the
   public key registry. If an address is found, query the Flow network to fetch
   the account's details. If an account is found, remember the relationship between the
   path used to generate this key, and the account's details.

> 1. Derive a key pair (starting with Account Index = 0 and Key Index =

Reviewer 3: Step numbering through here appears to be off by one.

2. Scan for the key usage by checking the public key registry.
   If the gap limit has been reached for both Key Index and Account Index, stop
   discovery.
    3.1. If no address is found in the registry 
        3.1.1 If the Key Index gap limit has been reached without finding any 
        addressed in the registry, then go to step 2, incrementing the Account Index
        by one and starting with Key Index = 0 again. 
        3.1.2 If the Key Index gap limit has not been reached, the go to step 2 and
        increment the Key Index by one. 
    3.2. If an address is found, query the Flow network to fetch the account's details. 
        3.2.1. If no account is found<sup>1</sup>, go to step 2, incrementing 
        the Account Index by one.
        3.2.2. If an account is found, remember the relationship between the
        path used to generate this key and the account's details. Then go to step 2, 
        incrementing the Key Index by one.

<sup>1</sup>Flow supports account deletion, meaning that an address found in the
registry may refer to a nonexistent account. In this case the account should be
skipped but discovery should continue.

> #### Account Discovery Conflict Resolution

Reviewer 2: Nice, I like this solution.

It is possible for a wallet to incorrectly apply the specifications in this FLIP
to generate keys.

Should this scenario occur, compliant wallets may be required to work around any
such previous incorrect usage.

##### Conflict Resolution: Incorrect Use of Account Index

If a wallet has used the Account Index field incorrectly to generate keys for a
user, conflict resolution logic may be required when attempting to generate new
keys.

When generating additional keys, the correct Account Index to use in the path to
generate the additional key should be:

- If adding a key to a new account:

>   - The smallest Account Index of which has not yet been used to generate keys

Reviewer 3: Suggest removing the word "of"
